rocks rolling down the slopes of a
rumbling volcano
pushing other bigger rocks on their way
and eventually
tumbling down into the ocean in a
humongous cascade
causing a wave the height of which the
world's never seen before
this is what might happen if the helena
slump of the hawaiian big island
falls off into the water the kilauea
volcano is far from dormant
the latest eruption occurred in 2018 its
eruptions are usually accompanied by
earthquakes of different magnitudes
and with each quake the magma rocks on
the slopes of the volcano shift down
these rock formations are called slumps
and the helina slump
is the most notorious of them all in
1868 the shift of this slump
caused a tidal wave rising as tall as 60
feet
but what's most troubling is that some
000 years ago a landslide here led to
one of the most powerful earthquakes
ever
which in turn led to a mega tsunami of
over a thousand feet in height
scientists are worried that such an
event may repeat in the future
if that happens the wave might engulf
the whole of hawaii
and easily reach both north and south
american coasts
geologists are quick to reassure though
that a landslide like this
is unlikely to occur anytime soon it's
just too early for that
but when it finally does the
consequences will be
catastrophic have a nice day yellowstone
national park in the western usa
is world famous for its dazzling views
and especially the colorful grand
prismatic spring at its very heart
but we should all stay aware that
yellowstone is
first and foremost an enormous caldera
basically a slumbering super volcano the
difference between a regular volcano
like kilauea from earlier
and a super volcano is that the latter
is thousands of times
more powerful imagine an eruption
spewing tons of huge rock and rivers of
hot lava
pumping out clouds of ash that make
countries stop air travel for weeks
and now multiply all of this by a
thousand
this is what a yellowstone eruption
would look like
at first a huge area in the middle of
the national park would shake
crumble and then blast upwards in a
megaton explosion
lava flows and magma rocks would cover
the area of about 40 square miles
roughly half of washington dc but the
greatest danger is the volcanic ash
the ashen plume would rise miles above
and get carried by the wind in
every direction since the eruption would
be far from ordinary
the spread and damage would also be much
greater than usual
the ash is thick and heavy so it would
cover a vast
area in a blanket destroying crops and
even buildings
were still it would spread in the air
and block out the sun
leading to a drastic drop in temperature
and an artificial winter
even regular volcanoes can lower
temperatures worldwide by a few degrees
a super volcano may potentially cause a
new ice age
luckily the chances of yellowstone super
volcano erupting in the near future
or at all are extremely low there have
been only three of those in the history
of earth
and there's no evidence such a disaster
should repeat
scientists estimate the probability at
0.000 14
which is lower than the chances of an
asteroid wiping us all out
speaking of which if dinosaurs could
talk
and were at least still alive for that
matter they'd tell you
that asteroid threat is as real as it
gets
scientists at nasa say they've tracked
90 percent of all near-earth asteroids
of significant size
and none of them are a matter of any
concern but
there are still the other 10 percent in
the great unknown
what's more asteroids can change their
line of flight
because of the pull of other celestial
bodies and eventually
turn our way lucky us now
if an asteroid big enough like a mile
across
hits the earth it will first cause an
explosion powerful enough to erase a
dozen big cities in a matter of seconds
then the impact will raise a cloud of
dust and debris that will block out the
sun
just like the ash cloud from a volcano
and cause a centuries-long winter on the
whole planet
but even if it falls into the ocean
which is more likely
a resulting wave will rise several miles
high
washing coastal cities off the face of
the planet but at least there won't be a
new ice age
although scientists are pretty sure
there's no such threat in the near
future
it can't be ruled out completely and
humanity needs at least
five years to prepare for this event if
a big near-earth asteroid suddenly
changes its course
and turns right toward our planet we
won't stand a chance against it
disaster movie anyone a much more
probable calamity though
rests right beneath our feet it's the
san andreas fault in california
the fault has been ready for rupture for
years now and scientists estimate that
an earthquake along this line
is likely to occur in the next three
decades and when it happens
it won't be nice they expect a magnitude
of 8.0
which is comparable to some of the most
devastating quakes in history
it's all the more dangerous since
california is home to some of the most
populated cities in the western us
including los angeles and san francisco
high-rise buildings are common there
and they're particularly vulnerable
against underground shakes
the san andreas earthquake might cause a
whole lot of damage
both to cities and countryside in the
worst case scenario
the ground might break apart destroying
buildings farms
and changing the landscape altogether
still
scientists believe that the probability
of such a quake
is only 7 percent for the next 30 years
so there's a rather big chance um 93
that we'll never see that in our
lifetime
yet there's another earthquake hazard
not so far away from the previous one
the mega thrust in chile the country
sits
right above the subduction zone an area
where two tectonic plates meet
and go one beneath the other at the
place of their meeting
stress is accumulated because of their
continuous movement
and once that strain is too much a major
earthquake occurs
chile has experienced a lot of quakes in
the recent years
and scientists are worried those might
be preparing the area for a really big
one
they believe a great earthquake is due
to happen before the end of the century
and it might be devastating to the
coastal area even smaller quakes caused
tsunamis that flooded the west coast
and a huge one like that is likely to
raise a wave of
incredible height on the bright side
chile now knows to prepare in advance
for the coming natural disasters
and geologists are pretty sure people
will be able to evacuate before the
earthquake strikes
in september of 1859 astronomer richard
carrington was looking at the sun
and suddenly saw a bright flare on its
surface
he made a note of it in his records but
only realized how important it was a
couple of days later
the energy from that flare reached earth
and struck it directly
causing northern lights to appear above
cuba and burning telegraph
lines all around the world this was
dubbed the carrington event
and it was a solar storm such storms hit
the earth fairly often
but none of them were so powerful as the
carrington event
neither before nor after but in 2012
astronomers registered a similar solar
flare whose energy
nearly hit our planet once again if it
had been just a week earlier
we'd have been in big trouble today
humanity relies on electricity in almost
every aspect of life
and a powerful solar storm would mess
with the electromagnetic field of earth
a lot
all electric appliances would either
shut down or short circuit
and huge transformers powering basically
everything
would go out of order for good it would
take years to repair them
and the cost of such a massive blackout
would count in trillions of dollars
the worst of it is that science is
almost unable to predict solar storms
and even if we could know about them in
advance we'd be powerless to stop them
the flare happens in a matter of seconds
and it takes about eight minutes for the
particles to reach the earth's
atmosphere
causing the disturbance the power outage
would come
a bit later in a day or so when a
massive cloud of plasma gets to our
planet
at the moment there's no protection
against solar flares
and the chances of one powerful enough
to cut all of our electricity in the
next few years
are quite high about 12 percent the only
good thing about all this
is that we now know of such a
possibility and can at least prepare in
advance
hey don't forget to pack some underwear
and socks you'll always need those